Dockerize a React Application and Set Up CI/CD Pipeline Using GitHub Actions

Objective:

To containerize a React application using Docker with a multi-stage build, and automate its testing, building, and deployment process using GitHub Actions CI/CD pipeline.

Description:

In this experiment, a React-based web application is developed and optimized for production using a multi-stage Docker build.
The first stage uses a Node.js image to install dependencies and build the React app, while the second stage uses an Nginx image to serve the optimized static files.
This approach significantly reduces the final image size and separates build dependencies from runtime dependencies, making the deployment process efficient and secure.

After containerizing the application, a GitHub Actions CI/CD pipeline is configured to automatically run on every code push to the main branch.
The workflow performs the following tasks automatically:

Installs Node.js and project dependencies

Runs automated tests (npm test)

Builds the production version of the app (npm run build)

Optionally deploys the build artifacts to platforms like GitHub Pages, Netlify, or Amazon S3

Additionally, the experiment includes troubleshooting network and WSL connectivity issues that can occur during Docker image builds on Windows systems, focusing on DNS configuration, WSL2 setup, and Docker service management.

Tools & Technologies Used:

React.js (Frontend Framework)

Docker (Containerization)

Node.js (Build environment)

Nginx (Static file serving)

GitHub Actions (CI/CD Automation)

PowerShell / WSL2 (System configuration and Docker management)

Steps Performed:

Create React App using npx create-react-app.

Add custom creative UI to the main webpage (e.g., animations, cards, styled components).

Create a multi-stage Dockerfile with Node.js and Nginx stages.

Create a .dockerignore file to exclude unnecessary files from the build.

Build and run the Docker image locally using:

docker build -t react-docker-app .
docker run -p 3000:80 react-docker-app


Configure GitHub Actions workflow in .github/workflows/main.yml to automate testing and deployment.

Troubleshoot Docker connectivity issues using PowerShell commands to fix WSL2 DNS and restart Docker services.

Verify successful build, container run, and CI/CD pipeline execution on GitHub.

Learning Outcomes:

After completing this experiment, students will be able to:

Understand containerization and how Docker can package and isolate a frontend application.

Use multi-stage builds to create optimized Docker images that are lightweight and production-ready.

Deploy static frontend applications using Nginx inside Docker containers.

Automate build and deployment processes using GitHub Actions CI/CD pipelines.

Troubleshoot Docker network and WSL2 configuration issues on Windows systems.

Integrate DevOps concepts (build, test, deploy) into modern web development workflow